
## Discussion

Root placement in our prairie plots appears to be weakly partitioned by taxonomy, with grasses increasing in abundance relative to forbs at greater depths (@Fig:famdepthrel) but little evidence of spatial patterning among other functional groups (@Fig:coeffect). The aboveground and belowground abundances of most species appeared to scale together (@Fig:abovebelowcor), but with very different slopes for grasses than for dicots. Given the high overall proportion of reads identified as Asteraceae and especially given their dominance in the shallow soil layers that contain over 80% of the total root mass in this system (@Fig:totmass), it is likely that much of the root mass in these plots originates from forbs rather than grasses. However, even if grass root mass in the deep soil layers is small relative to the surface and relative to other taxa, it may still be ecologically important for access to water, nutrient economy, and carbon storage.

One goal of this study was to infer the species composition of root mixtures, to allow richer insights from other studies where bulk biomass samples are collected without identifying their component mixtures. We found that most genera were at least occasionally present at all depths, that the majority of the sequences obtained were from forbs in the Asteraceae, that these were especially dominant in the shallow soil layers, and that despite grasses dominating aboveground measurements of cover and biomass we detected few reads from grass roots near the surface and only some in the deeper layers. Considering biomass and taxon identity together, it is thus likely that relatively shallow forb roots account for a substantial fraction of the root C input to this prairie.
However, this does not necessarily mean that grasses are a minor component of total root mass: To attempt a quantitative conversion from reads to tissue mass requires knowing the potentially species-specific relationships between root biomass and DNA yield [@Rewald:2012cm; @Zeng:2015df], which we did not attempt to characterize here. The lower slope of grasses in the aboveground-belowground relationship (@Fig:abovebelowcor) and the apparent lower detection of grasses in our mock community (@Fig:mock_control) are suggestive of a possible extraction or sequencing bias against grasses, but even if present we expect this to be constant across samples and thus should not affect comparisons of relative functional group dominance between depths.

An additional caution for our method is that the precision and accuracy of our barcode identifications are limited by the taxonomic resolution of the ITS2 region, the potential for intraspecific variation [@Alvarez:2003df], and the completeness of available sequence databases. Following previous workers [e.g. @Fahner:2016dl], we regard all species identities from this dataset to be tentative, and in a few cases even genus assignment was uncertain. This was particularly evident in the C4 grasses, for many of which we obtained BLAST ties with multiple best results widely spread across the PACMAD clade. However, because our site has only a few congeneric species (@Tbl:splist) and our hypotheses were focused at the level of phylogenetically-distinct functional groups, further refinements of sequence identity are unlikely to change the conclusions. Using multiple primer sets may help to increase taxonomic resolution and would be straightforward to add to future work using the Fluidigm PCR platform [@Brown:2016fm], but in our mixed-sample setting the bioinformatic challenge of resolving multiple markers would likely be prohibitive [@Fahner:2016dl].

Previous work on the spatial structure of grassland root communities has found mixed results. An old-field site in Ontario [@Kesanakurti:2011eg] was similar to ours in finding positive correlations between aboveground and belowground abundance and in finding less roots from grasses than expected from aboveground data, but differed in finding very strong spatial partitioning. This difference may be attributable to differences in spatial scale (they extracted individual roots from 5x5x5-cm soil blocks, we pooled roots from multiple cores in each ~2 m sampling area) or to differing environmental controls in a heterogeneous old-field environment than in a planted site under active crop management. By contrast, two grasslands with differing soil water regimes in Wyoming showed co-occurrence patterns much like those we observed, with most species present in all samples and only weak changes in detection with depth [@Frank:2015ky]. In addition, mapping of individual roots at the mm scale in these same Wyoming grasslands were consistent with our finding of more positive than negative species co-occurrences [@Frank:2015ky]. Taken together, these findings support the conclusion of Price and co-workers [-@Price:2012hk] that belowground community structure is largely determined by *abiotic* filtering; perhaps we should not be surprised to find little spatial structure in our highly fertile, previously tilled, evenly planted, annually mowed site.

Although root mass in the deep soil was low relative to the surface layers, these roots are likely to be ecologically important. By allocating proportionally more roots to the deep soil than other groups, the grasses in this prairie may gain access to more reliable water supplies and reduced competition for nutrients that help maintain their aboveground dominance. Even small increases in the amount of deep root can contribute to drought survival of grasses [@Nippert:2012fd], reduce N leaching losses [@Smith:2013cj], and increase soil C storage [@DeDeyn:2008hv; @AndersonTeixeira:2013bx], implying that the taxonomic partitioning we observed is likely to increase the management value of prairie restorations as well as their ecological resilience.
