
## Methods

### Experimental site

Our experimental site is the University of Illinois Energy Farm (Urbana, Illinois, USA: 40.06N, 88.19W, elevation 220 m), where five plots of restored prairie were planted in 2008 (four 0.7 Ha plots plus one 3.8 Ha plot). The site has a continental climate with a mean annual temperature of 11°C and approximately 1 m of precipitation annually. It is established on deep, highly fertile Mollisol soils (Argiudolls, mapped as Dana, Flanagan and Blackberry silt loam) with organic C contents more than 1% throughout the top 50 cm (@Fig:totmass). The site was used for agriculture for at least 100 years before establishment of the current experiment. For further details on the establishment and management of the site, see previous work by [@Zeri:2011er; @Smith:2013cj; @Masters:2016kw].

The prairie plots were established by seeding with a mix of 28 species native to Illinois (@Tbl:splist). Species were chosen to balance four stated goals: Maximum biomass production, ecosystem resilience, trophic diversity, and locally adapted species. Seeds were obtained from Pizzo and Associates (Leland IL), treated at planting time with a mycorrhizal inoculum ("AM 120"; Reforestation Technologies International; Gilroy CA) that is primarily *Glomus intraradices* (Neal Anderson, RTI Inc.; personal communication), and overseeded with a spring oat (*Avena sativa*) cover crop. The plots were mowed after senescence each year and the above-ground biomass was baled and removed. 25 of these 28 species remained detectable in 2011 [@Feng:2013gy] and in 2012 a total of 32 species were censused in the plots, with the five most common species *Andropogon gerardii*, *Sorghastrum nutans*, *Ratibida pinnata*, *Helianthus grosseserratus*, and *Coreopsis tripteris* collectively providing about 75% of total cover (@Tbl:splist).


### Sample collection

To characterize the spatial distribution of species with depth, we collected mixed root samples on July 15-18 of 2013, after most late-season grasses were well emerged but before most early-season plants began to senesce. At 24 locations (one in each quadrant of each 0.7 Ha plot, two in each quadrant of the 3.8 Ha plot), we used an 8 cm bucket auger to collect roots and soil from five depth increments (0-10, 10-30, 30-50, 50-75, and 75-100 cm) of 3 cores within a 2 m radius. We pooled all three cores from each location, collected a ~0.5-1 kg subsample of mixed roots and soil from each depth, and returned the remaining material to the holes. The resulting 120 samples were stored on ice in 1-gallon Ziplok bags for transport to the laboratory, then frozen at -80 °C the same day and stored until further analysis.

To characterize the genetic diversity of our target species and generate a mock community for use as a sequencing control, we collected voucher specimens on August 31 and September 1, 2013. For each of the 33 plant species present in aboveground surveys (X. Feng, unpublished data), we located 3-5 individuals, identified them to species by leaf and flower morphology, and used a trowel to extract roots still attached to their well-identified crown. We pooled all roots from each species, placed them in Ziplok bags, placed them on ice for transport to the laboratory, and froze them at -80 °C the same day for storage until further analysis.


### Root recovery

To separate roots from soil, we thawed mixed samples overnight at 4 °C, then screened them through a 2 mm sieve followed by manually picking all visible roots using forceps. The picking process took about 30-90 minutes per sample and all sieves, forceps, and gloves were wiped with ethanol immediately before use to minimize contamination by non-sample DNA. After root picking, a subsample of the root-free bulk soil was collected and lyophilized, then ground and combusted to determine total carbon and nitrogen content (4010 CHNSO Elemental Analyzer; Costech, Valencia CA).

We then rinsed all roots in three changes of sterile water, with the final rinse including 10 minutes of sonication to dislodge any residual soil from the the root surface, then lyophilized all samples and stored them at room temperature. Single-species root voucher samples were treated identically to the mixed root samples, with the exception that bulk soil had been removed at collection time and therefore no sieving or hand-picking steps were necessary.


### DNA extraction and amplification

To maximize extraction of DNA from tough root tissue, we ground all samples once in a dry mortar and pestle at room temperature, then again in liquid nitrogen to a very fine powder. We then weighed ~100 mg of tissue from each sample and extracted whole DNA using a Powersoil-htp isolation kit (Mo Bio Laboratories, Carlsbad CA) according to the manufacturer's directions, including an optional initial bead-beating step (GenoGrinder; 4 x 30 sec at 1750 RPM, 2 min between rounds) followed by a 60 min incubation at 65 °C with 1% proteinase K. We then performed a post-extraction cleanup using materials from the same kit (E. Adams, Mo Bio; personal communication): We diluted the DNA to  a volume of 100 µL with DNAse-free water, added 50 µL of bead beating solution and inverted to mix, then added 25 µL each of solutions C2 and C3, inverted to mix, and centrifuged at 10000 xg for 2 minutes. We then collected the supernatant, added 2 volumes of solution C4, vortexed, and loaded the sample onto a spin filter. Finally, we washed with 500 µL of solution C5 and eluted with 50 µL of C6.

After extraction, we submitted whole DNA to the W.M. Keck Center (Urbana, IL, USA) for amplification and sequencing. In addition to DNA extracted from mixed samples, we included nominally pure extracts of root DNA from four species with high aboveground abundance [*Andropogon gerardii*, *Sorghastrum nutans*, *Silphium perfoliatum*, and *Elymus nutans*; @Feng:2014wv], water extractions as a negative control on the DNA extraction + PCR + sequencing process taken as a whole, and a mock community of DNA from 29 species combined in equimolar quantity plus one species (*Heliopsis helianthoides*) at twice the concentration of the others. The second internal transcribed spacer of the nuclear ribosome gene (ITS2) was amplified from each sample by microfluidic PCR using the Fluidigm Access Array chip and sequenced by synthesis for 2x301 paired-end cycles (MiSeq, V3 chemistry, Illumina Inc, San Diego CA). The 5' linker construct for each sequence consisted of Illumina flowcell-binding primer i5, Fluidigm linker pad CS1, and plant-specific ITS2 primer S2F [@Chen:2010il] for a final foward linker sequence of `5'-AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCT-ACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACA-ATGCGATACTTGGTGTGAAT`. The 3' linker construct for each sequence consisted of the Illumina flowcell-binding primer i7, a 10-base oligonucleotide barcode that was unique for each sample, Fluidigm linker pad CS2, and plant-specific ITS2 primer S3R [@Chen:2010il] for a final reverse linker sequence of `5'-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGAT-XXXXXXXXXX-TACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCT-GACGCTTCTCCAGACTACAAT`, where `XXXXXXXXXX` indicates the variable barcode sequence.


### Data processing

The raw Illumina read files were preprocessed by sequencing center staff before delivery by using CASAVA 1.8 to remove sequencing primers, PhiX reference reads, and reads from unrelated samples sequenced in the same flowcell lane. We then used cutadapt 1.8.1 [@Martin:2011eu] to trim primers, discard all reads that did not begin with the expected primer, and trim 3' bases with a Phred quality score below 20. We then joined the overlapping ends of each read using using the RDP maximum likelihood algorithm [@Cole:2013jw] as implemented in Pandaseq 2.10 [@Masella:2012fc] using a minimum alignment quality of 0.8, a minimum assembled length of 25 bases, and a minimum overlap of at least 20 "bits saved" [corresponds to ~10 bases; see @Cole:2013jw]. We then used the `split_libraries_fastq.py` script in QIIME 1.9.1 [@Caporaso:2010jf] to assign sequences to samples by barcode matching.

To assign sequences to taxonomic units, we used a de novo clustering approach. We dereplicated sequences and removed singletons and suspected PCR chimeras using VSEARCH 2.0.4 [@Rognes:2016ee], extracted full-length ITS2 variable regions using ITSx 1.0.11 [@BengtssonPalme:2013fn], clustered the results using VSEARCH with a similarity threshold of 99%, and assigned taxonomy to each cluster using BLAST+ [@Camacho:2009fc] against the GenBank `nt` database. We then mapped taxonomy for the full dataset by using VSEARCH to search the full sequence file (including singletons and chimeras) against these cluster centroids, also with a similarity threshold of 99%. After taxonomy assignment, we collapsed all clusters assigned as the same phylotype (species, genus, or family depending on the analysis of interest) into single taxon groups using the `phyloseq` 1.16.2 package [@McMurdie:2013ky] in R 3.3.1 [@R331:2016], then corrected for between-sample differences in sequencing depth by transforming raw read counts for each taxon group into sample proportions. Taxa with a mean abundance less than 1% per sample were removed from plots, but included in multivariate analyses.

To visualize the effects of depth and C/N content on root community composition, we performed nonmetric multidimensional scaling followed by permutational MANOVA using the `adonis` function of `vegan` 2.4-1  [@Oksanen:2016vegan] in R 3.31 [@R331:2016], using Jaccard distance as the response variable; depth, C, and N as environmental variables; 'plot:location' as a blocking effect. To assess species co-occurence patterns, we used the package `cooccur` 1.3 [@Griffith:2016cooccur13] in R 3.31.

Full analysis scripts and raw sequence data are available online (https://github.com/infotroph/Prairie_seq).
