
## Results

The MiSeq run and sequence cleanup produced ample, high-quality sequences for the planned analysis: The raw file contained 1286163 plant ITS2 reads, of which 730235 were successfully end-paired, quality filtered, and assigned back from barcodes to samples. These clean reads contained 494505 unique sequences, of which 459986 were observed only once in the dataset (singletons). Of the 34519 sequences observed at least twice, 2219 were identified as probable or borderline PCR chimeras by `vsearch`. These chimeric sequences accounted for a total of 8526 reads, or ~1.2% of the raw dataset. A further 75 sequences were identified as incomplete or undetectable ITS2 regions by `ITSx`, leaving a total of 32225 ITS2 sequences to be clustered at 99% similarity into 1347 OTUs, which we then used as reference sequences at 99% similarity to map the 730235 reads (singletons included) of the cleaned sequence file, for a final sequence-by-sample table of 576650 reads. Sample coverage was excellent, with 110 of the 120 mixed root samples having more than 1000 reads (1355-8998), sufficent for confident analysis. There was no apparent change in total read count between samples from differing depths.

After obtaining best-match barcode identities for each of the 1347 OTUs clustered at 99%, we collapsed OTUs to phylotypes by combining groups of OTUs that all yielded the same taxon as their top BLAST hit. When we collapsed at the species level, we obtained 158 phylotypes that were identified as coming from 70 genera across 16 families, which is notably higher than the 32 species, 22 genera, and 6 families known from site vegetation surveys (@Tbl:splist). Many samples contained high read counts from several different "species" of genera that have only one known species at the site (@Fig:mock_control). From this we infer that, at least with current databases, ITS2 barcode identities may be more reliable at the genus level than the species level.

Of the genera detected both belowground and aboveground, per-plot mean belowground read proportion was positively correlated with percent aboveground cover, but the slope of the relationship was much lower for grasses than for any dicot group (@Fig:abovebelowcor), possibly indicating a lower sensitivity to detect grasses by this ITS method. Similarly, the number of reads obtained from grasses in our mock community was consistently lower than calculated from input DNA concentrations, and neither of two species from the Lamiaceae was ever detected either in the mock community or the mixed samples (@Fig:mock_control).

To test for spatial partitioning between species, we examined how often pairs of species were found together in a given sample. Most species co-occured with each other at rates broadly compatible with random occurence. Of the pairs that appeared nonrandom, more were positively correlated (overdispersion) than were negatively correlated (spatial partitioning), and there were no evident differences in co-occurrance rate between samples from different depths (@Fig:coobsexp). However, these effects differered between functional types: Species from the Asteraceae showed neutral to positive co-occurrence with species from all families, while Poaceae species had positive co-occurrence with other Poaceae but negative co-occurrence with most species from other families (@Fig:coeffect).

The overall taxonomic makeup of roots shifted with depth: The proportion of reads identified as grasses increased from roughly 10% of near-surface reads to approximately one-third of reads in the 75-100 cm layer. Forbs from the Asteraceae declined somewhat with depth, while legumes were relatively consistent across depths (@Fig:famdepthrel).
These partionings were consistent across groups within each functional type: When grouped by genus, all grasses were more abundant in deep layers than near the surface. Within the Asteraceae, only *Silphium* was more abundant in middle layers rather than shallow, possibly attributable to being the only genus at the site with a mix of tap-rooted (*S. lacinatum*, *S. terebinthinaceum*) and fibrous-rooted (*S. integrifolium*, *S. perfoliatum*) species. 

Our observation of increasing grass dominance in deeper layers was supported by multivariate analyses: Nonmetric multidimensional scaling produced a first axis highly correlated with depth (@Fig:ordiplot), with grasses associated with deeper layers, Asteraceae with shallow layers, and legumes orthogonal to the depth axis. The largest single explanatory variable was sampling location, which we treated as a conditioning variable and which explained ~40% of total inertia; after accounting for location, depth added a small (~8%) but significant (PERMANOVA pseudo-F=8.7; p=0.001) further increase in inertia explained. Organic C, N, and C:N were all strongly anticorrelated with depth and neither they nor their interactions with depth added any further explanatory power (PERMANOVA; all R^2^ < 0.01; all p > 0.4).
